Version 2.0
===========

This is a major release, heavily focused on simplification where possible.

Config has been dramatically simplified, especially reference configurations.
Many fixes and improvements that have been requested over the years have been
addressed here. The docs have been completely rewritten.


Reference handling
------------------

- The separate ``workflows/references/`` workflow has been completely removed.
  Reference generation rules are now integrated directly into the respective
  RNA-seq and ChIP-seq workflows. See :ref:`decisions-references` for detailed
  reasoning.

- The reference configs have been **dramatically** simplified.

- Using prepared reference configs is now more obvious and can use standard
  Snakemake commandline args (``--configfile``, ``--config``) to modify at run
  time.

- The prepared reference configs have been updated to the latest assemblies.

Infrastructure
--------------

- Simplified the test framework (see :ref:`decision log: test framework <decisions-testframework>`)

- The custom wrappers system (``wrappers/`` directory) has been removed.
  Peak callers and other tools are now implemented as straightforward scripts in the
  :file:`scripts` directory.

- Cleanup of :file:`lib/utils.py`, removing unused functions.

- Updated all tool versions in ``env.yml`` and ``env-r.yml``

- Removed unused dependencies (GAT, kallisto, etc.)

- Default to conda rather than mamba as package manager frontend

- Complete rewrite of documentation.

- New ``decisions.rst`` documenting architectural decisions and rationale

Snakefiles
----------

- **Snakemake 8+ is now required**.

- Resource specifications changed, for example ``mem_mb=8192`` is now
  ``mem="8g"``. With this string representation, we no longer need the
  ``utils.gb()`` convenience functions, so they have been removed.

- Autobump functionality was removed.

- Snakefiles are formatted using ``snakefmt``.

- The patterns/targets system has been removed (see :ref:`decision log for patterns/targets <decisions-patterns>`).

- A principled approach to ``params:`` was used (see :ref:`decision log for params <decisions-params>`).

Workflow removals
-----------------

- Removed colocalization workflow due to limited usage and maintenance burden.


RNA-seq workflow
----------------

- Removed kallisto (but kept salmon)

- Removed STAR two-pass mode (it added complexity and was rarely used in practice)

- Removed preliminary strand check on subset of data; use the existing strand
  check on full data.

- Self-contained reference rules

- Improved preflight checks that catch configuration errors before workflow runs:
  required columns in sampletables, reference configuration validation, SRA Layout
  column verification, and warnings about common misconfigurations

- Removed separate libsizes table in MultiQC (redundant with General Stats table)

- Use config's organism key to automatically handle rRNA FASTA, rather than manually configuring

- Paired-end BAMs are temporarily name-sorted before featureCounts, dramatically improving performance

- Paired-end FastQC results are run and properly reported in separate sections in MultiQC


ChIP-seq workflow
-----------------

- Removed plotFingerprint rule (see :ref:`decision log: plotFingerprint <decisions-plotfingerprint>`).

- Simpler sampletable no longer requires antibody and biological material
  (though they're still recommended for clarity)

- Sampletable ``merged_label`` now an alias for ``label`` to be more clear that
  it reflects the name of merged tech reps

- ``merged_label`` automatically filled in with samplenames if there are no techreps

- macs2 --> macs3

- Paired-end FastQC results are run and properly reported in separate sections in MultiQC
